Title: Socialism works, but doesn't scale
Date: 2020-05-09
Category: Politics
Tags: libertarianism
Summary: Can libertarians and socialists agree on anything?
Status: draft

In a discussion it is recomended to first find a common ground of agreement,
before working on the differences. This puts both parties in a better mood to
find a shared truth.

Maybe libertarianism and socialism have both something to add to the table, can
these two opposite views of the world agree on anyting?


## Socialism works

We all have a very early and direct experience with socialism. We practice it
within our families. We teach our kids to share and be supportive. We are
preached similar ideas at the congregation. We put it into practice as
volunteers in NGOs.

We are social animals after all. Our brains are wired to live in small
communities, groups & villages, with our kin or people we share a common set of
values with or a common past.

Socialism comes very natural to people. It is digestible and appealing.
Presents ideas of an altruist society that doesn't leave anyone behind.
Provides to the needed, cares about people, balances the economic forces, takes
from the rich and helps the poor.

Solidarity, equiality of oportunities, social justice, minimum wages. Who can
oposse to that? These are good things, noble goals.

Socialism not only feels emotionally superior, but it offers an easy and quick
explanation to every day *dramas*.

On the other hand, libertarianism requires rational thinking to make sense,
needs to be studied, it's all about the ultimate consequences, it's
explanations of reality are counter intuitive.

If you are struggling to make ends meet, would you listen to someone who talks
about how the federal reserve creates inflation and distorts the economy with
it's artificial interest rates or someone who talks about universal basic
income, tuition free schooling and human compassion?

When I hear my libertarian colegues all I hear are economy lessons and
individual freedom. But all socialists understand is *greed and mind your own
business selfishness*. Capitalism is broken, the system is unfair, someone has
to fix it.


## Socialism doesn't scale

This way of relating with family, neighbours and work acquitances, most of the
time through rules that are written nowhere but are a cultural legacy of shared
responsability and cooperation towards common goals, has it's limits.

With a bigger population, a more diverse society, there are no strong bonding
links between it's members. The trust and selfless altruism that might have
worked in your local community, now becomes unnatural.

Empathy dissapears as the distance between governance and governed widens, your
ability to change the course of action of such society decreases. The virtues
of the socialist ideals turn into a dilusional mirage.

This disconnection makes the government less accountable, prone to corruption.

Central planning is now inneficient and too risky, it affects too many people
and policies probably assume too much. Regulations are slow to adapt and impose
hidden costs. Politics become aggresively toxic. No one is satisfied.

Here is where libertarians should step in and say: *I warned you about against
feeding the demagogic leviathan*. Big government is a fiasco.

The dynamism and eficiency that capitalism achieves, in coordinating efforts of
a society, producing better goods and cheaper services has no sutable oponent.

Free markets, tolerance, divergence, innovation, competition and freedom to
experiment are indispensable at this scale. Now ideas of limiting authority,
decentralizing power, and questioning regulations really shine.

As a libertarian, I do undestand socialists. I'm willing to accept a certain
amount of forced colectivism, so long as it stays local, accountable and in
competition with other communities. But I still stand by freedom, as the beacon
of light guiding my life and principles.
